Add JOSS paper draft. (#83)
MDAnalysis/solvation-analysis: joss_paper/paper.md

   index: 2
 - Molecular Foundry, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, USA
   index: 3
date: 10 January 2023
bibliography: joss_paper/paper.bib
---

# Summary

The macroscopic behavior of matter is determined by the microscopic arrangement
of its atoms. Understanding and predicting how matter behaves requires knowledge
of it's microscopic properties. Since this is often difficult or impossible to
observe experimentally, researchers use simulation techniques like molecular dynamics 
to probe the microscopic structure and dynamics of everything from proteins to
battery electrolytes. SolvationAnalysis makes it easy to study the structure of
liquids in molecular dynamics simulations. It calculates the properties researchers
are usually interested in and provides a means of interactive exploration.

# Figures

![A summary of SolvationAnalysis capabilities. \label{fig:summary}](docs/assets/summary_figure.jpg)

# Statement of need

Molecular dynamics studies of liquid solvation structures often replicate
established analyses on novel systems. In electrolyte systems, it is common
to calculate coordination numbers, radial distribution functions, solute

> dissociation, cluster speciation, etc. In principle, these analyses are highly

Reviewer: with my JOSS reviewer hat on this probably needs a citation.

difficult or impossible to observe experimentally. Instead, researchers use
simulation techniques like molecular dynamics to probe the microscopic
structure and dynamics of everything from proteins to battery electrolytes.
SolvationAnalysis extracts solvation information from completed
molecular dynamics simulations, letting researchers access key solvation
structure statistics with minimal effort and accelerating scientific research.

# Statement of need

Molecular dynamics studies of liquid solvation structures often replicate
established analyses on novel systems. In electrolyte systems, it is common
to calculate coordination numbers, radial distribution functions, solute
dissociation, and cluster speciation [@Hou:2019]. In principle, these analyses are highly
similar across a diversity of systems. In practice, many specialized bespoke
tools have sprung up to address the same underlying problem. Enter `SolvationAnalysis`, 
an easy-to-use Python package with an interactive interface for
computing a wide variety of solvation properties. Building on `MDAnalysis` and
`pandas` [@Michaud-Agrawal:2014] [@Gowers:2016] [@pandas:2020], it efficiently

> processes output from a wide variety of Molecular Dynamics applications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
processes output from a wide variety of molecular dynamics simulation packages.
```

`SolvationAnalysis` was designed to free researchers from laboriously

> implementing common calculations. In addition to routine properties like

Reviewer: ```suggestion
implementing and validating the correctness of common analysis calculations. In addition to routine properties like
```

coordination numbers, solute-solvent pairing, and solute speciation,
SolvationAnalysis uses tools from the SciPy ecosystem [@numpy:2020] [@scipy:2020]
to implement analyses of network formation [@Wang:2022] and residence
times [@Self:2019], summarized in \autoref{fig:summary}. To make visualization fast, 
the package includes a robust set of plotting tools built
on top of `Matplotlib` and `Plotly` [@matplotlib:2007] [@plotly:2015].
A full set of tutorials based on state-of-the-art electrolyte systems 
[@Hou:2019] [@Dong-Joo:2022] are also included to familiarize new researchers
with solvation structure analysis. Together, these features allow for
rapid interactive or programmatic calculation of solvation properties.

> 

Reviewer: Maybe add something about enabling high throughput analysis? Just a thought

Author: I had something about high throughput analysis but I decided to take it out. I'll start using that language once I have a better way to do high throughput simulations :)
